aug dev update (#110)
irods/irods.org: content/posts/irods-development-update-august-2025.md

Title: iRODS Development Update: August 2025

> Date: 2025-08-26 10:00

Author: Bumped to 8/28.

Author: Kory Draughn
Slug: irods-development-update-august-2025
Status: published

Hello reader,

For those who missed it, three iRODS interns presented their impressive work at [TRiRODS](https://irods.org/trirods). They covered work on Cyberduck, the Zone Management Tool, GenQuery2, and PAM Interactive for the Python iRODS client. Videos are available now, so check them out.

> With iRODS 5 now available, we've started investigating the idea of a metrics reporting tool built on access time information. The goal is to provide a tool which enables organizations to make decisions based on data access patterns. We're still in the early stages, so there's nothing to show yet. We'll have more to share as things progress.

Author: ```suggestion
With iRODS 5 now available, we've started investigating the idea of a metrics reporting tool built on access time information. The goal is to enable organizations to make decisions based on data access patterns. We're still in the early stages, so there's nothing to show yet. We'll have more to share as things progress.
```

Author: Done.

For the server, we've merged support for Enterprise Linux 10 (EL10) and Debian 13. Work on `irsync` has landed. It no longer creates directories unexpectedly and we've improved handling of stale replicas and overwrites of data objects. Through the work of our interns, the GROUP-BY clause for GenQuery2 has grown support for multi-argument/nested functions. All of this work will be available in iRODS 5.0.2.

On the build and packaging side of things, work to sunset many externals packages and migrate to distro-provided compilers has begun. As we move towards Normal-and-Boring, the externals packages list continues to shrink and make it easier to support more environments. The process is working!

> For the Docker-based development and testing environments, the Enterprise Linux Dockerfiles have been genercized and new projects for EL10, Debian 13, PostgreSQL 17, and MariaDB 11.8 have been added.

Author: Done

While working on Cyberduck, we ended up releasing irods4j 0.3.0. This release includes improved compatibility for Microsoft Windows and support for the PAM Interactive authentication scheme. You can learn more about that by viewing the [release notes](https://github.com/irods/irods4j/releases/tag/0.3.0).

Jargon has been updated to fix a bug in how groups are added in iRODS 4.3.4 and later. While Jargon is officially deprecated, a new release is on the way. This is in support of the upcoming Metalnx 3.1.1 release.

To wrap up, we've moved the jargon-irods-ext codebase into Metalnx. This was done to ease the release process, but more importantly, to make it easier to replace Jargon with irods4j. We've also removed the rules sidebar option and all supporting code.

Let's see, that was four releases in one month! We hope you found this month's update informative. Let us know what you think of the new releases and consider adding a star to the GitHub repositories if you like how things are progressing.

See you next month!

### August Technology Working Group

> - [Imaging Working Group](- https://github.com/irods-contrib/irods_working_group_imaging)

Reviewer: check this hyphen before the link
